---
title: "The Catalogue for Astrophysical Turbulence Simulations (CATS)"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/Burkhart_CATS
excerpt: 'The Catalogue for Astrophysical Turbulence Simulations (CATS)'
date: 2020-12-08
venue: 'ApJ'
paperurl: 'http://dfielding14.github.io/files/Burkhart_CATS.pdf'
citation: 'Burkhart, B., Appel, S. M., Bialy, S., Cho, J., Christensen, A. J., Collins, D., Federrath, C., Fielding, D. B., Finkbeiner, D., Hill, A. S., Ibáñez-Mejía, J. C., Krumholz, M. R., Lazarian, A., Li, M., Mocz, P., Mac Low, M. -M., Naiman, J., Portillo, S. K. N., Shane, B., Slepian, Z., Yuan, Y.. &quot;The Catalogue for Astrophysical Turbulence Simulations (CATS) &quot; <i>ApJ</i>  ApJ, 905, 14, Dec 2020'
authorrank: "nth"
---
Turbulence is a key process in many fields of astrophysics. Advances in numerical simulations of fluids over the last several decades have revolutionized our understanding of turbulence and related processes such as star formation and cosmic ray propagation. However, data from numerical simulations of astrophysical turbulence are often not made public. We introduce a new simulation-oriented database for the astronomical community: the Catalogue for Astrophysical Turbulence Simulations (CATS), located at www.mhdturbulence.com. CATS includes magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) turbulent box simulation data products generated by the public codes athena++, arepo, enzo, and flash. CATS also includes several synthetic observational data sets, such as turbulent HI data cubes. We also include measured power spectra and three-point correlation functions from some of these data. We discuss the importance of open-source statistical and visualization tools for the analysis of turbulence simulations such as those found in CATS.

[Download paper here](http://dfielding14.github.io/files/Burkhart_CATS.pdf)

Burkhart, B., Appel, S. M., Bialy, S., Cho, J., Christensen, A. J., Collins, D., Federrath, C., Fielding, D. B., Finkbeiner, D., Hill, A. S., Ibáñez-Mejía, J. C., Krumholz, M. R., Lazarian, A., Li, M., Mocz, P., Mac Low, M. -M., Naiman, J., Portillo, S. K. N., Shane, B., Slepian, Z., Yuan, Y. (2020). , <i>ApJ</i>, [905, 14](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/1538-4357/abc484), Dec 2020